Could such extra dimensions exist? And
if so, how would we try and probe
whether that's the case? If you imagine
looking at an extended object like a
wire, it just looks one-dimensional. It
just looks like it has a length. But if
you were able to get really close to
that wire, you'd see that it also has
something like a thickness. And so that
extra direction is what's called
compact. Is it possible to have a
compactified time dimension as well? Oh
wow. Yeah. Imagine two dimensions of
time. Wow. The problem with two time
dimensional theories and compact time
dimensions in general is that it's very
hard to maintain causality. Higher
dimensions look down on us. That's
[Music]
Star Talk. Neil deGrasse Tyson, your
personal astrophysicist. Got Chuck Nice
with me. How you doing, Chuck? Hey, I'm
doing great, man. Thanks. All right. a
comedian, actor. Yeah. Seen a few TV
commercials here and there. Yeah. You
know, I'm uh Listen, sometimes I have
nothing to do. Okay.
Well, today we got a really cool topic
that's always on everybody's mind. Well,
everybody who cares about the universe,
you know, even people who don't, but
I'll get I'll get into that later. Yeah.
You know what we're talking about? I've
heard some really weird stuff from
people that you know, they want to get
into it that Yeah. All right. All right.
We're talking today about string theory.
Yeah. And now we have our man about town
string theorist Brian Green right up the
street, right? But I said, you know, all
the universe is not Brian Green. You
know, he would beg to differ. So I said,
so we reached out to the cosmos. All
right. And we found Laura Anderson.
Laura, welcome to Star Talk. Thank you
very much. It's a pleasure to be here.
Yeah. So you are associate professor of
physics at Virginia Tech. One of our
producers is from Virginia Tech. So you
you're right at home here among us.
Yeah, we you're family now. Yeah, you're
family. Good to be among friends. Also
like Brian Green, you have a double
affiliation also with the mathematics
department. I do. I'm an affiliate
professor of mathematics, which means I
can supervise math grad students as
well. So you just you're just taking
jobs from everybody. His professor's out
on the street because of Laura Anderson.
I I can try to picture that how they
they're like I'll s I'll do your math
homework for for for money. Exactly.
Will math for food. I think
unfortunately that is a job. It's called
tutors. Really? Really? Exactly. uh and
your research includes I have here the
geometry and particle phenomenology in
string theory. So we just want let's
just get to the bottom of this. What is
string theory? Yes. String theory is an
attempt to reconcile Einstein's theory
of general relativity the theory of
gravity with the formalism of quantum
mechanics and quantum field theory. So
it is a consistent quantum theory of
gravity. um may not be the way that
quantum gravity works in our universe,
but at the very least, it's a
theoretical playground where we get to
ask questions about quantum gravity.
Now, you've made an assumption in there,
and I agree with this assumption, but I
want to hear you defend it. You you are
trying to absorb Einstein's general
theory of relativity, our modern
understanding of gravity, right, into a
quantum description. Why aren't you
trying to take the quantum and absorb it
into a general relativity description?
Because inherent in what both of you
said there must be an inongruency that
would cause you to have to do that.
Exactly. So why don't you start with
that law? What what is the inongruency
here that you're trying to resolve? Two
of the greatest intellectual
accomplishments of the 20th century in
my opinion are Einstein's theory of
gravity and the description of
fundamental interactions in nature um as
described by particle physics. So things
like uh a description of you know quirks
fundamental particles how they interact
with each other that gives us a
description of things like
electromagnetism and the strong and weak
nuclear forces. these sort of basic
building blocks of matter, these
fundamental Legos that we can hook
together, they're described very well by
by quantum field theory. The issue, the
the sort of discrepancy between these
two is that each separately are able to
make predictions that are incredibly
accurate in our modern world. So, we can
make predictions to like 13 significant
figures using either of these
theoretical frameworks. That' be 13
decimal places, right? 13 significant
figures. Yeah, I'm going to say that's
pretty accurate. It's pretty great.
Yeah. and like things like modern GPS
wouldn't work without general
relativity. So we have a lot of ways of
testing these theories. They seem really
robust and that they're telling us
really important things about how the
world behaves. Unfortunately, if you try
and combine the two, so you try and
describe phenomena that might need both
tools. So for example, things where the
interaction of particles and very short
distance scales are in play, but also
where there's really strong gravitation.
So for example, inside a black hole, um
that would be a regime where you need
both of these these theories, these
frameworks to agree and give you
concrete predictions. And unfortunately,
the theories break down when you try and
combine them. And you don't end up
getting useful answers. You get very
manifestly wrong answers. They're called
disastrous infinities. Um things that
just don't predict anything.
Disastrous infinities. Man, you can't
get more diss than that. Sounds like the
worst marriage ever. Yeah, it's not
great. Disastrous infinities. So, so
what gives you the confidence that it is
the quantum physics understanding that
will absorb gravity and not gravity
absorbing quantum physics? It's a great
question. So, I I think that it should
be a two-way street. So, um in order to
describe either phenomena, you need
something that can be described in both
frameworks. Einstein's theory is sort of
intrinsically classical um meaning that
this picture of the curvature of space
and time. It's not designed for sort of
the quantum mechanical uncertainties
that we know and observe in particle
physics. So in that sense we know that
Einstein's theory probably at a granular
level if you sort of zoom in should
evolve into something quantum
mechanical. Um but exact form of that is
up for for exploration. Okay. Okay. So
that works. Now you mentioned
fundamental particles and you go back to
ancient Greece the atom was a
fundamental particle that was the
smallest thing that you could be that
you could be right and then we break the
atom oh there's other particles and so
you you you listed like electron that's
fundamental and you mentioned quarks
what gives you the confidence that we
can't keep dividing cutting further
further yeah that's a great question I
don't think I I think most theoretical
physicists would not say that we are
100% confident that we stop there. This
is the the zoo of particles that we've
observed so far that seem to match the
phenomena, the forces and interactions
and effects that we see in nature very
well. But absolutely there could be
smaller things in play and indeed string
theory posits that there are. Okay. Oh,
really? Right. Exactly. That's this
little vibrating. So the string is the
fundamental string is the fundamental.
So take us there. Take us out. Now how
does strings come into this? So, the
idea behind string theory, the, you
know, the the two-minute version of what
string theory tries to do is it says,
imagine that instead of describing
particles as little point particles that
move through space, imagine that instead
if you were able to zoom in far enough
that you could have an object that has
an extended length associated to it. And
the the very rough idea is that just
like a violin string can vibrate in
different ways and produce different
notes, these little fundamental strings
can vibrate into different
configurations. And it turns out they
can change their properties. Um the
mathematics of how you describe these
things moving can change their
properties based on how they vibrate. So
they can vibrate one way and be an
electron. They can vibrate another way
and be a quark. Um, and that seems like
a very sort of cute idea for how to
describe a lot of physics in a very
simple framework. I But if that's if
that's the case, in principle, you ought
to be able to to pluck the string that
is otherwise an electron and get a quark
out of it. Have you done this? No. And
the problem with this, so I'm gonna tell
you one thing that's really cool about
this framework and then also two things
that are not cool. One of them is is
very much to do with what you said. So
um why can't you just test or observe
you know are these strings there? The
theory predicts that these fundamental
length scales of strings are so small
that we would need a particle
accelerator about the size of the solar
system in order to smash atoms together
and directly see those strings. Um which
unfortunately we do not have access to
those type of energy scales yet. Just to
affirm what is implicit in your
statement. The larger the particle
accelerator, the faster you can speed
the particles so that when they collide,
there's much more energy in that
collision. You'll probe regimes that
previous accelerators could not. That's
right. Okay. And so you just scale up
what we got going now and you need
something the size of the solar system
to get to these energies, right? Which
doesn't seem very viable. No, it's not.
So what's your what's plan B? Yeah,
before I answer that, let me let me just
throw one thing out there about string
theory that I think is important to say.
So, if you ask about quantum mechanical
point particles and you say what kind of
spaces could they move through, it turns
out that quantum field theory or quantum
mechanics can be formulated in any type
of space. So, they can move through
basically any background that you
choose, any any, you know, configuration
of space and time. But if you ask the
same question for these uh little
onedimensional strings, if you say where
can a quantum mechanical string move, it
turns out that the only spaces that
they're allowed to move in and do their
their thing of vibrating in different
ways and being different particles, the
only space they can do that in are
spaces that obey Einstein's equations of
general relativity. That sounds good.
Wow. Yeah. So you actually get gravity
for free in this formulation of quantum
mechanical strings. So we we sometimes
say that quantum gravity is consistent
and also compulsory in string theory
because it's being you know you're
forced on you by the equations that the
strings may satisfy. So that's a good
feeling then because it means something
is talking to something else in the form
in the formulation right that that that
was not crowbarred in to begin with.
That's right. So it's sort of being
handed to you and that fact is I think
something that early in the development
of string theory got a lot of people
excited. Unfortunately, like many good
things, uh things come with a catch. And
the catch in string theory is that this
beautiful formulation I just described
of, you know, you can describe all of
particle physics by one little extended
object. You get gravity for free only
seems to work if the universe that this
happens in has more than three spatial
dimensions and one timelike dimension
that we seem to see in our universe. So,
you need extra dimensions because right
now we live in four dimensions, which is
three spatial plus time. you need more
dimensions in order to make this thing
work, but we don't have access to more
dimensions. So, we can't really say for
sure. Well, it's I mean, it seems like a
really big intellectual leap, right?
We're we're pretty happy with our three
dimensions of space and one dimension of
time. So, the first pass is like could
this at all is this just a dealbreaker,
right? Is there any way that this could
be consistent with what we've already
observed about the universe? And as you
were just alluding to, right, the
question is, you know, could such extra
dimensions exist? And if so, how would
we try and probe whether that's the
case? Um the the requirement that we can
see right off the bat about these extra
dimensions is if they were to exist,
they can't be the same size as the rest
of the dimensions that we see in our
universe. So if we look around, we can
see that, you know, we have very large
spatial extent for, you know, front,
back, side to side, up and down, and of
course time. But if there were these
other directions, they would have to be
really, really small compared to the
rest of our universe. And the analog for
that is if you imagine looking at an
extended object like a wire from really
far away, it just looks one-dimensional.
It just looks like it has a length. But
if you were able to get really close to
that wire, you'd see that it also has
something like a thickness, a radial
direction. And so that extra direction
is what's called compact. Um meaning
that it's very small compared to say the
length of the wire. So, one thing that
we do know is that if this had any
chance of working, these extra
dimensions would have to be compact and
very small compared to the rest of our
universe. Okay, you're freaking me out
right now because and this I mean I'm
just going to say it. So, I was down in
Costa Rica doing Iawaska for a week. And
in that time I had an experience where I
met these beings who told me about
dimensions that existed
inside of our dimension. So they were
alongside of yet inside of the dimension
that we live in. And I can only think
that maybe that was a pre-supposed
pre-planted post-hypnotic suggestion
because I have actually read about
string theory because if it's not
or or what drugs have you been taking to
to get your and my my follow-up question
is what did you do? That's right.
I I hear the question. Yeah. Is it
possible to have a compactified time
dimension as well or is we only is all
of the models only stuck with one time
dimension? Oh wow. I never even
considered that. Yeah. Imagine two
dimensions of time. Wow. Holy crap. Go
ahead. Yes. So the problem with two time
dimensional theories and compact time
dimensions in general is that it's very
hard to maintain causality in such
theories. So if you have a time
direction that can loop back on itself,
it's possible to have the whole go back
in time and shoot your grandpa situation
hitting you pretty hard. So to maintain
consistent theories with multiple time
directions or or compact time
directions, it's not I'm not going to
say it's impossible, but most people
don't consider that a very viable way
forward. You would have to discard
causality altogether in order to do
that. I think in general the claim would
be it would violate causality in such
theories. Um, so there may be some
creative ways to get around that, but
generically I think that's true. By the
way, we have a Stephen Hawking on one of
our earlier episodes. You can find it in
our in our archives. We went to
University of Cambridge and and chilled
with him for a bit. Tell me, he proposed
a time travel conjecture something like
that. Tell us what that was and does
that save us from this? Is that I mean
there are a number of of conjectures say
in the the theory of gravity that say
that um causality is an important
structure. So that um in general one
would not expect that consistent
theories of gravity or indeed quantum
mechanics should allow such you just
can't get it to work. Okay. Okay. That
that's fine. I mean yeah I mean listen
that me that that removes many movies in
the repertoire where you got to go back
and change the past. Exactly. Like
Terminator the Terminator is done.
Forget about it. We look back on the
past but we look forward to many
futures. So the idea of being able to
look back and say at this particular
point all those many futures still exist
if I could get back to that point then I
could change it to one of these other
tracks you know which I mean it's a
great fantasy and it makes sense to have
that fantasy but what you're saying is
it's a stupid fantasy cuz it ain't never
going to happen. Well, I would say, you
know, never say never in insights. You
got to be careful, but um certainly it's
not something that I think most people
have a good idea how to make work in a
consistent way at the moment. And that's
why I'm not a scientist. And just
consider to say never say never. You
said never. You said never. You just
said never. You can't say never say
never unless you're saying never. Hey
Star Talk fans, I don't know if you know
this, but the audio version of the
podcast actually posts a week in advance
of the video version. And you can get
that in Spotify and Apple podcast and
most other podcast outlets that are out
there. Multiple ways to ingest all that
is cosmic on Star Talk. Before we sort
of pivot to this whole thing of
phenomenology cuz I want to know it's a
big word with a lot of syllables. I've
heard it invoked before especially in
particle physics. But before we step
there, I just want to understand how
will you ever test string theory? And we
know in advance that you have naysayers
out there uh physicists among them who
are saying you're diverting time,
resources, graduate students, faculty
positions to something that doesn't even
classify as a legitimate scientific
theory or or hypothesis because you need
to be able to test it. Without the test,
go home. So let me hear your response to
that. Absolutely. I think that's a
really fair question. um you know for
any theoretical framework where you're
trying to describe things if there's a
big intellectual leap right and for
example extra dimensions is a pretty big
leap um you have to justify that with a
payoff right you have to say what is the
benefit that I'm going to give you in
terms of you know structure and
predictions and and you know what you're
learning from this theory so to push
back on the you know how are we going to
test it um let me observe first that in
uh particle theory in general the time
scales between predicting structure in
particle theory and then being able to
see it an experiment over the last half
century have gone you know increased in
size considerably. So one example of
this is the prediction of the Higs Bzon
made by Peter Higs which took about 50
years from the prediction that this
particle should exist to its observation
at the LHC. That means the theorists are
just way ahead of the experimentalist.
You got some deadbeat experimentalists
there. I I would not say that at all. I
would say that that dialogue of theory
and experiment is really important. But
I'm just pointing out that direct
experiment of you know direct
verification by experiment of lots of
things is hard. That doesn't mean that
one shouldn't do it. It just means that
you know you have to to be deciding what
time scales are relevant for that
question. Um for string theory I would
say the problem is a lot worse than it
was for something like the prediction of
the Higs boson because the energy scales
are so massive to directly uh observe
strings. So for me personally, I I'm
interested in trying to decide whether
string theory is useful a lot faster
than that in the point of view of my
career and I remain very agnostic as to
whether that's the case. So you want to
be alive when when I want to be alive
when we decide this and also you know if
somebody could could demonstrate to me
right now that string theory was for
sure not useful for our universe I'd
choose to work on something else. So
what do I think is the the sort of most
direct way to those types of answers is
that in string theory many types of
structure and and results in physics are
really intercorrelated. So it turns out
that in something like um the the
particle physics description of all the
particles we know about so far the
standard model of particle physics. So
that's a the organization of all the
particles that we know on one in one
chart and you say this this interacts
with that and this connects here and
it's a it's a beautiful thing actually
when you step back it's a tri I mean
that happened in I'm older than both
y'all that happened in my lifetime in
the basically the 1970s we started
assembling a little earlier too but the
full picture was coming together as we
found these other particles to flesh it
out so it's a periodic table of
particles okay all right an organiz
organizing principle. Very good. Okay.
So, pick it up there. Sorry. Quick
anecdote from when I was a kid. I got
interested in physics reading books like
by people like Brian Green when I was,
you know, in my early teens. And I had a
little um I'd written down the standard
model like on a piece of paper. I made
my little zoo of particles and I like
carried around on a piece of paper for a
bit as a a super, you know, nerdy young
young person. Girl geek in the house.
Love it. Girl geek alert. Yeah, totally.
Totally. But um but I totally agree.
It's it's the zoo of what what we know
is there. And the point I was going to
make in relation to string theory is
that in something like the standard
model, there's a lot of free numbers. So
for example, nothing in that theory
tells you what the mass of the electron
is or how the quarks couple to each
other. Those numbers are just observed
in our universe. Well, you said free
numbers, you mean not predicted,
correct? Not predicted by the structure
of the theory. Now, in contrast to that,
in string theory, if you found a
solution of string theory that produced
particle physics like we see in our
universe, none of those numbers are
free. They're all determined by the
configuration of these extra dimensions
and the structure of the theory. So,
it's a huge array of physics that you
have to get right all at once. And here
I've been talking about particle
physics, but you also have to answer
questions about cosmology and the large
scale structure and history of the
universe. So, how are you going to
decide if string theory is wrong? I
think that it's most likely that we
would be able to say that the structures
that we see in nature, we can argue that
we either can or can't get the right
sort of regimes of numbers and effects
that we already know are there um much
more rapidly than we're going to build
an accelerator to see a string. I love
that. Oh, that's Yeah. Yeah. So, what
you're saying is you you whether or not
you can test the dimensionality or or
the other sort of physicality of string
theory. If you could, if your theorist
can go in the back room and come out and
say, I I pluck this string this way,
it's going to give me an electron and
it's going to give me this mass, right?
And it's the only mass that's going to
come out of this, right? Cuz that's the
right number. That's the right number
and the right vibration and it's going
to look like an electron. That that
that's a Nobel Prize right there. Yeah.
It's it's like it's like the way they do
like modeling or weather modeling. they
we have a prediction and then we run the
model on what's already been done and if
we get those numbers then we can have
confidence in the predictive model
itself. That's right. Again, so the idea
is I just articulated it. This has been
around for like 40 years. Um this was
what when people were first formulating
string theory, everybody was excited and
they thought we were going to do exactly
what you just said. You know, you're
going to go around, you're going to look
at the solutions of the string theory,
you're going to say, "Boom, here's our
universe. Here's all these numbers. We
just predict everything. it's great.
That hasn't happened and uh there's you
know people are still trying to think
about this. So what are some of the big
obstacles? One of the issues is that it
turns out that when you ask how many
different configurations for these extra
dimensions can there be? Um initially
the hope was that maybe that was very
restrictive. Maybe there was just a
couple. Um the the question of how many
could you have? So if you said what if
we just had um say two extra dimensions
that uh obeyed the consistency equations
from string theory. Turns out there's a
unique answer from the differential
equations that tell you what that shape
could be. If you ask is there, you know,
what happens if there are four extra
dimensions, there's a unique answer. And
then if you say, what happens if there
were six extra dimensions, which happens
to be the extra dimensions that we think
needs to arise to give what we see in
nature. Turns out there are half a
billion configurations and counting that
have been found so far. So, it sounds to
me like what you guys are saying is we
have this instrument and on the
instrument there's a certain amount of
notes that are just resonant in the
instrument and now we have to figure out
one song
because all those notes can make however
many billions of songs.
We got to find the one song that all
those notes can play. But it also sounds
like nature's just messing with us.
It sounds so this is a one of the the
things that people push back on string
theory on is they say okay if all these
possible solutions of string theory
exist how is it ever going to be
predicted and you know you could just
have this big soup of things and some
people have even made that argument.
They call it the string landscape where
they say you know you could just land
anywhere. So so what if there's some
place in the string landscape that looks
like our universe there's all this other
junk. What is the theory actually
telling us then? And the argument I
would I would say against that is that
in something like quantum field theory
which we already talked about for the
standard model this zoo of all the the
you know quirks and lepttons that we
know in nature there are an infinite
number of quantum field theories that I
could write down that aren't our
universe but it doesn't matter because
we do know how to write down one that
does look like our universe. So string
theory is sort of a natural extension of
quantum field theory in some ways and it
has a lot of flexibility that may have
nothing to do with the physics that we
observe in our universe. But the
question is once you zoom in on the the
parts of that theory that do you learn
anything? So for example, do you find
that if you see the particles that we
already know that additional particles
must be there or additional forces or
can we correlate features in cosmology
and the large scale structure of the
universe like dark energy or dark matter
with particle physics that we know to be
true? I don't want to lessen the
significance of how you describe that.
But if I understand it, you're saying on
this, like you said, this landscape of
half a billion possible songs that it
could be and you want the one song
that's yours, it's not useful if you
find it unless upon finding it, you get
other insights about the universe we're
in. Uhhuh. Because otherwise, it's just
a just so story. Right. Right. It's the
universe is just that and we and we
explain it with just that and it doesn't
take you any further down the street. Is
is that a fair way to characterize it?
Yeah. And another thing that people are
asking in within string theory is how
many possible quantum theories of
gravity could there be? So imagine that
string theory isn't how our universe
works. We know it's a quantum theory of
gravity, but it might be too idealized
to describe our universe. So in physics,
we talk about, you know, pretending that
cows are spheres in order to make the
math easier. Consider a spherical cow.
Oh, gotcha. We do that all the time.
Okay. Is it? Yeah. It's just easier that
way. Our uh our society of physics
students has a spherical cow t-shirt
here for at Virginia Tech. Yeah. Yeah.
It's a thing. That's that's pretty wild.
It's a thing. If you want to maximize
the milk production of a cow, right?
Start with a spherical cow. Start with a
spherical cow. Yeah. Right on. Yeah. I
don't want that milk. I don't want I
don't want milk from a spherical cow. I
don't I'm sorry. Yeah. Yeah. I'm going
goats milk from now on. Yeah. But yeah,
the point I'm making is that maybe
string theory isn't, you know, it's just
too idealized to describe how quantum
gravity works in our universe. But a lot
of theorists are questioning, okay, if
that's the case, we know this is a
quantum theory of gravity. So if you had
another one, right, like the right one
that isn't a string theory, how could
those two theories be related? And
there's groups of string theorists who
are trying to argue and and provide
mathematical theorems. Um, for example,
someone named Kerman Bafa at Harvard has
created something called the coortism
conjecture. And what he's positing is
that perhaps if you had more than one
quantum theory of gravity, they must be
connected in some way. Otherwise, you
would develop inconsistencies in how you
could describe quantum gravity quantum
gravitational effects. So the the
argument I'm making here is that even if
string theory isn't the right one,
whatever that might mean, maybe it's
connected to the right one. So maybe we
still learn structure about how string
theory can inform what our universe
should look like. Is is this what not
exactly what you just said but the
comprehensive look at all of this is
this what gives rise to the multiverse
and infinite number of universes that's
a a different question but an
interesting one that the answer is no
the answer is no okay
we'll say that for we'll say that for
later on your specific specialty within
string theory is particle phenomenology
and could could you just introduce us to
that absolutely so that's the question
of whether string theory can produce
solutions that look like the particle
physics that we see the the standard
model for example um and the
interactions of the other fundamental
forces that aren't gravity and so one of
the things that I've worked on um at
various times over my career is trying
to ask for the types of solutions that
we we see in string theory what um
characterizes those that would give us
things like we see in nature so um again
coming back to this concept of the
string landscape Um there's a famous
number of like possible solutions that
you can get for this this string
landscape. A number of like 10 to the
500 which is unimaginably large is
thrown around. 10 to the 500. 10 to the
500. That's not a number. That's not a
number. It's crazy. That's not even a
number. But in that counting of
solutions in string theory, um so this
is again, you know, something that
people say, oh, you know, 10 to the 500,
how are you going to learn anything? But
all of those 10 to the 500 that people
have counted historically, none of them
included an electron. Okay? So if you
know something about the universe you
want to model, you don't care if there's
10 to the 500. Yeah. None of those can
possibly give rise to the type of
physics we see. So the type of of
research that I do is trying to
correlate what shapes for these extra
dimensions, what properties of string
theory will narrow the field down to
things that are close to our universe.
Okay. So So have you gotten there yet?
What's what's you know what's the hold
up here? We're getting better. I mean in
all honesty um you know we we have not
delivered on that yet but we are I feel
like still making legitimate progress.
Okay. So how about this? Because uh one
of the great redeeming qualities of all
scientific discovery or the search
thereof is even if I don't get to the
thing I am trying to find out along the
way I find out all this other great
stuff that now gives us computers and
digital cameras and GPS but I didn't get
to what I wanted. So what what have you
guys contributed that has been your
happy accident? Well, let me say that
more tightly. Say it. Tighter. You
ready? No. No. I love that. Go ahead. I
loved it, but I want to say it another
way. All right. Go ahead. Okay. Um, in
your failures, how have you succeeded?
So I think the the answer to that is is
really big and string theory as a field
has really expanded to you know huge
different numbers of sub fields and
researchers who do really different
things. So there are many different
answers to that question I could like
you know percolating in the back of my
mind. One is um the discovery of the
holographic principle which says that uh
phenomena like gravity are very deeply
related to things called gauge theories
which again describe the interactions of
particles and charges. Um that these
things can be related uh in different
dimensions of spaces. So the statement
is that uh gravitational theories can be
related to gauge theories that live on
the quote boundary of that space. um
things like the holographic principle
are an extremely deep uh bit of
structure that says that you know gauge
theories and particle physics and
gravity are not as different as we
thought they were. That's that's a
really um profound I would say
observation that has arisen in string
theory. So the simplest example that
I've heard of the holographic principle
is the surface of the event horizon of a
black hole. Okay? And and correct me if
I'm wrong here. So you fall through the
surface has a memory of everything that
passed through. Interesting. And so you
can think of the information content of
the surface as the full understanding of
anything everything that's inside that's
inside because there's no loss of
information because it's all retained
retained there. So that inside the black
hole and and if we are inside a black
hole of our universe because we have a
horizon which you can analogize to an
event horizon then we would be the
holographic projections of that. So is
this a fair did I c did I capture that
correctly? Wow. Okay. Given that I've
yet to heard a physicist rebut that. So
is it general agreement that that's
probably real? I mean in an idealized
sense yes. um how much that you know
pertains uh you know what you learn from
that in our universe I think is still up
for grabs and this is again something
people are are thinking about very
actively um other analogies that I would
give for you know useful stuff that's
come out of string theory is um
relationships again between things like
particle physics and cosmology so you
know the study of uh you know dark
energy dark matter descriptions of
inflation those things being related to
you know how particle physics uh
realizes those and also structure in
mathematics
Um so there are a lot of new fields of
mathematics that were sparked due to
that dialogue between u mathematicians
and physicists that arose through string
theory and these shapes of extra
dimensions. So that's good. So you're
exciting mathematicians, right? Yes. And
then they reached out and wanted some of
you in their department, right?
Sometimes. Yeah. And and I think you
know it's a very much a mutual
relationship which is why you're taking
a job away from another professor
professor.
So as one example of this um there's
something called the minimal model
program in uh geometry which tries to
classify basically all these um
higherdimensional complex shapes like
all of them you know can you write down
compact geometries in any number of
dimensions and characterize all their
properties and and come up with sort of
a zoo of every possible geometry. Well
we get this is this is your other
specialty algebraic geometry. That's
right. Was that a spin-off of the rest
of these interests? Is that No, it's
very much tied to it. So the question of
trying to produce particle physics from
uh string theory that's that's a
particle physics question but the actual
computation you have to do really rests
on the properties of these compact extra
dimensions. So you have to do a ton of
geometry to extract the numbers that you
want like the mass of the electron and
the coupling of the quirks. So it's sort
of intrinsically interdicciplinary in
that sense. Wow. So I want to hear more
about this geometry. That's I mean
that's crazy. So here's something that
is so simple and lowdimensional. So,
don't laugh at me, but I was but I want
you to take this to your level. Uh, I
was talking with an a topologist algebra
or some one of these math folk and we
were talking about knots. Okay. Just
knots. All right. And you take a string
and tie a knot in it. And it's a knot.
It's a square knot or any whatever your
knot is. Whatever knot. Okay. Whatever
is your knot. And
then we That's We're in three dimensions
here. So, a one-dimensional string can
make a knot. I said, "What's that in
four spatial dimensions?" He said, "You
can't tie a knot in four dimensions.
You would just lift it up and it would
just un unravel." And I and I So that
just messed with me. And then I then I
thought, let's take away a dimension.
Let's go to two dimensions. Okay. Okay.
Two dimensions. And if you have two
dimensional people in a flat surface, if
you take a rope and just loop it on
itself,
they cannot undo that. That is an
unsolvable knot to them because they
can't pass it back over itself to come
around. Right. All right. But I in three
dimensions just pick it up and it's
gone. Right. So that was so I was just I
couldn't sleep that night and then I
wondered myself what is going on in the
mind of someone who's imagining all of
this in even higher dimensions than
that. What kind of drugs are you hiding?
Did you stop? Come on Lara, don't hold
out on me.
I shared my Iawaska. Give us the real
dope. You never told us that Iawaska
highdimensionality person talk to you.
Well, you know what? I I have You guys
are the first to know to be honest
because it was so freaky and freaked me
out and I never talked about it. But
then when she said string theorist of
the future said you are our savior.
I was the Neo of string theory. Neo.
Yeah. What is the matrix Neo? So please
tell us. So I really like the the not
analogy. Let me give another one that's
sort of more directly related to the
kind of stuff I do. So we talked about,
you know, Einstein's theory of gravity.
You could ask imagine that the entire
universe was two-dimensional, right?
Could you have curvature that could lead
to like gravitational like theories in
two dimensions? And it turns out there's
only one number that you get to to
specify. And it's basically, you know,
if you imagine like the surface of a
sphere, it's whether it's, you know,
positively curved or negatively curved
like a saddle. That's it. And so you
can't have dynamical gravity in two
dimensions. Likewise, you know, the form
gravitation takes will change as you go
up in dimension. So absolutely the this
question of you know what can you not
and unnot? What can you use to describe
how space and time might curve all of
that changes with different dimensions.
Yeah. And so you have to get your brain
up in that. I'm telling you right now
I'm you know I need a nap
just from this conversation.
So, so, but the the copout thing here is
all the higher dimensions are all
compacted, so I don't have to think
about or worry about it. I'll never see
them, right? How how impactful are the
compacted dimensions if you if you're
trying to manifest gravity in higher
dimensions? Does gravity care if it's
compacted or not? Does it just care
about the dimensionality? It does. It
does care if it's compact. It It cares
about the compactness. It cares about
the shape of those extra dimensions. And
indeed, we believe in string theory that
those extra dimensions have to still
obey Einstein's equations. So they still
have to to be consistent gravity in in
those extra dimensions. Suppose we lived
in eight dimensions and he came up with
general relativity in eight dimensions.
Who who were you to say his 3 + one
dimensional thing that higher dimensions
have to obey that? He did that in this
measly 3 + 1dimensional world. You can't
put you can't put commandments on higher
dimensions. They are superior to us in
every way and you know it. Yes. I I I I
hate to say it but higher dimensions
look down on us. That's
I'm sorry I had that's a t-shirt right
there. That is That is a good t-shirt,
man. So I actually torture my my
undergraduate students in my class on
Einstein's theory. Um because Einstein's
theory can be actually formulated in any
number of dimensions very easily. So
there's actually nothing special about
four. Um so frequently for my students
I'll say you know imagine that this was
in six dimensions or 10 dimensions or
you know she said it can be formulated
easily but she didn't say what she meant
by easily. Very relative statement
there.
But one thing that isn't easy and this
is actually uh related to why it's hard
again to you know really bring string
theory to its full fruition is that when
you do do Einstein's theory in higher
dimensions the equations you have to
solve are nastier. So, humans are not
really good at nonlinear differential
equations. Um, and they are especially
not good when they go into high numbers
of variables and high numbers of
dimensions. So, isn't that something?
Okay. So, why don't you just get a math
fluid AI bot to do this? I mean, that's
the whole that's the whole point of I
mean, yeah, exactly. Just it's hard for
you, but give it to an AI. Yeah. So, one
of the the things that we've had to try
and do in string theory to extract some
of these predictions is actually solve
Einstein's equations for these extra
compact dimensions. And we don't know
any analytic solutions um for how that
means, you know, exact solutions you
could write down on a piece of paper um
for Einstein's theory for the six
dimensions that we would need um for
these these string compactations.
They're called in science. you can solve
a problem analytically with an equation
and say there's the answer and some you
can't and you have to actually run the
experiment or or increment a model and
see the results each time just to see
where it goes, right? And so that's
ugly. We hate those, but we kind of
recognize that that's like in chaos
theory, you have to sort of calculate it
out, right? You can't just write down
the the solution. So, uh, if you're
saying you can't in principle or it's
just too laborious, just not known how
to do it yet. Um, so in general, solving
Einstein's equations in any number of
dimensions, you know, for any system is
is hard because they're nonlinear. So,
what that means is that the the
gravitational theory is actually
backreacting or talking to itself. So,
the fact that you have gravitons, you
know, the the quantum mechanical
description of gravity in the space,
that can create more gravity. So this is
really wild in terms of the differential
equations because normally you could say
I find one solution to the theory and I
find another and I can just add them
together and still get a solution. But
in general relativity that doesn't work.
You can't add two solutions and get
another solution. You have to start over
every time. So so when we when we model
we do this in astrophysics all the time.
There's stuff that's just too
complicated. But I know at any instant
what's supposed to happen and then I
just load load that up. But you what
you're doing is you're calculating with
these differential equations. These are
equations that you can calculate at
every time step and it's following you
on the time step. Right. All right. But
you can't just solve out the whole the
whole shebang. So got So all right. So
you But so tell me again why you can't
use AI. You So we can actually and
that's that's a a fun topic. So um I was
involved for a number of years with
numeric simulations like you're
describing where you use a computer to
try and solve the equations that you you
can't otherwise. And historically in
order to do those computations we had to
put them on supercomputer clusters and
like wait for months to get results. Um
but now actually um with the advent of
AI this is something that my
collaborators and I have worked on and
now you just do it on your iPhone right
now we can actually do it on a laptop.
Um, so we've started using machine
learning algorithms to numerically solve
some of these differential equations. So
this is different than using like, you
know, looking at photos on the internet
and then having AI generate a new photo.
We don't have these solutions. So there
isn't a database that you can train an
AI model on, but you can still use the
framework of these neural networks to
try and solve really complicated
equations. And indeed, um, I've worked
on that and and lots of other people in
the field have. And we found that using
these techniques, we can speed up a lot
of computations in a really substantive
way. And this actually made it possible
just recently for groups to compute
quark masses in string theory for the
first time. So to be clear, these are
not the quark mass values that we
actually observe in nature. Um that
would be awesome, but we don't see that
yet. But we can say if you just hand me
some extra dimensions, whatever they may
be, and then say what would the you know
the quirks look like in that universe,
now we can actually come up with those
numbers using machine learning
algorithms. Chuck will go back on his
Iawaska trip and get the person from
that dimension to verify the quark quark
mass. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly.
And Chuck will be the oracle of physics.
And I'm I'm up for it. I'm telling you
right now. I'm I'm ready. I'm ready to
go do more Iaska. So I'm I'm ready.
So let me ask another thing. You talk
about what discoveries can come out of
this. Is it possible because this
excites us all. We don't say it every
day, but we feel it. Could any of this
could any of this bring forth new
physics? Because up till now, everything
you've said has been within the
framework of the quantum quantum field
theory, general relativity. And imagine
before Einstein was born, you would not
even know that relativity was a thing
you could use to solve your problems.
So, is there some new physics waiting to
emerge either either out of your work or
some yettobe born genius that will
you'll look at and say, "Oh my gosh, I'm
going to give a fast astro case here."
Okay. Uh at turn of the century, uh the
orbit of of Mercury around the sun
wasn't quite following Newton's laws,
you know. It was like, well, there's
probably another planet there tugging on
it. Yeah. We even named the planet. I
mean, that's how Oh, really? Yeah. We
called it Vulcan. Oh, nice. Yeah. Yeah.
Go 1910. Just look up planet Vulcan.
Like there it is. Okay. And so and we
were happy. Well, how come no one saw
it? Oh, cuz it's too close to the sun.
It's in the glare. So we we had we had
it was all there. It was all worked out.
All worked out. And then Einstein comes
up with general relativity. He wasn't
trying to explain it, but he showed that
at very strong gravity, Newton's laws
fail. You plug into his equations and
there's no disagreement with the thing.
So Vulcan died overnight. But the new
physics
transformed the physics we were already
working with and gave us better answers
than to move on with. So what I learned
from that is Einstein killed Vulcan,
Tyson killed Pluto. Stop.
That's not the lesson I was trying. It's
a good lesson. No, it's not. No. So new
physics could take a lot of different
forms. Um so you know one example might
be perhaps there are more than the four
fundamental forces that we've already
observed in nature. So could there be
you know a so-called fifth force uh
another version of something like
electromagnetism or um you know the
strong weak nuclear force. Um that would
be an example of new physics. Uh other
things that we know we don't understand
very well include things like dark
energy and dark matter. um questions
like you know general relativity tells
us that there are these disastrous
infinities you know in the center of
black holes there's singularities so
what actually repairs those
singularities in a quantum uh you know
gravitational theory what what tells us
how physics really behaves inside there
um that's definitely new physics and
that would be the hope of the kind of
thing you you'd like to see oh wow to so
so okay so you think there's new physics
out there not again the claims on you
know what can string theory deliver I'm
I'm still somewhat agnostic on that. Um
but I think it's really interesting to
try and push the theory to find out say
you know can you show that this just
can't be used to model our universe
which is a real possibility and it's
going to break somewhere you can't get
there or can you you push it to try and
make some of this structure visible. So
I just I'd love 100 years from now look
back on this conversation and say look
at those idiots back in 2025. Yeah. This
will be a kindergarten video 100 years
from now. I hope so.
So, I got something else here about a
duality in string theory. What's going
on there? Yeah, this is something that I
and my collaborators are working on at
the moment. That's a cool word, by the
way, duality. I love duality. Duality.
So, the idea behind duality is that you
could have two different theories or two
different geometries as they arise for
these compact extra dimensions in string
theory that secretly are different sides
of the same coin. So an analogy that I
give sometimes in talks is if you ever
looked at some of these optical
illusions photos on the internet where
you know you have a picture that's
either a vase if you look at it one way
or two faces if you look at it the other
way you can say you know is it a vase or
is it faces and the answer is it's both
right it's both packaged the question in
string theory is you have all these
different you know half a billion
configurations for extra dimensions do
they all lead to different physics and
the answer that we think is no um there
are known equivalences of different
so-called topological spaces. These are
things that have, you know, a different
geometric properties like their number
of holes and their structure. Um, those
different topological spaces can
actually lead to the same physics that
we would see. So that if there's
redundancy in that that is really
powerful because it means you don't have
to search through half a billion
possibilities. You can, you know, maybe
sort of fold those possibilities in half
and only look at some portion of them.
Um, some of these dualities have been
around for, you know, 20 years in string
theory. and my collaborators and I think
we have new examples uh which require uh
less um super symmetry. So a less
spherical cow than people had assumed in
the past. Okay. Yeah. We're growing some
legs in the cow for example. Um and we
think that this may improve our ability
to calculate lots of things and also
teach us some new properties
mathematically about how these spaces
can behave. Wait, catch us up on super
symmetry. So super symmetry is something
that comes along for the ride um for
some formulations of string theory which
says that all the quirks and lepttons
that we see in nature may have
additional partners um so for example
instead of uh you know a quark you have
a squirk a another partner um that would
be much heavier than the existing
particles that we've seen. So when
you're describing super symmetry, it's a
symmetry beyond the symmetries that are
already known and loved in the standard
model. That's right. So all these these
sort of three generations of of quirks
and lepttons that we've seen already um
there would be another whole set of
those particles that would share many of
their properties but be heavier in mass
and sort of the opposites and that each
theory, you know, each particle that was
say a bzon would have a firmionic
partner and so on. All right. So, so
what you're saying is
you're not content with just these three
regimes we have in the standard model.
Just hand us somewhere in the universe
other regimes above that and see what
properties they might have and that
could explain stuff that we don't now
understand. That's an idea. And people
initially thought this idea might
explain some really um important
questions in particle physics. uh for
example to do with the mass of the Higs
Bzon that would be what's called
low-cale super symmetry and particle
experiments like the LHC search very
hard for this and didn't see it. So some
people consider super symmetry not a
very useful idea because they thought
you know it might appear in these
regimes and it would not be useful. Um
people are reinvestigating this question
in string theory. You know some of the
solutions of string theory are super
symmetric some are not. Um what we
generally would agree on is that if you
did have super symmetry it would have to
be at a very high scale. So it would be
much um these particles would be much
heavier than you could see in an
experiment like the LHC and that the
symmetry would be spontaneously broken
in universes like ours. So that by the
time you got down to, you know, where we
live now, you would only see the
standard model particles at the energy
and not the other ones that would have
helped birth it. So So
um I'm going to say that's rather
convenient though.
I'm just going to say
so the question is like why do you need
that symmetry right if if you're kind of
getting rid of it back when you know you
really want to be talking about the
physics yeah conveniently discarding it
that's a great great question um in some
string theories it still plays a role in
terms of regulating the quantum
mechanical behavior of the theory and
making it well behaved so in that sense
you know you're still using it
theoretically for something even though
you don't need it to describe the
particle physics that we are observing
in nature. But I think all string
theorists would ask, it's a really
interesting question to say how much of
the super symmetry can you get rid of
and then still preserve the features
that are of interest to us. So the types
of dualities I was describing, these are
are perhaps um new because they involve
less reliance on super symmetry than we
had in the past. And so we're still
observing this sort of redundancy or
these different descriptions of the same
physics packaged different ways. Um, but
we don't need as much super symmetry. If
if memory serves, the graviton is not in
the standard model. Is that correct?
That's right. So that means no one is
thinking about a super symmetric
particle to the graviton because that
would be kind of interesting. Yeah, you
you certainly could for any particle um
you know any gauge bzon, you could have
a what's called a gino. So a a super
symmetric particle. Gauge eno. They're
just making pulling it out of the ass.
Yes. It's sounds like you're naming like
pharmaceutical products. This is before
my era in physics, but I do feel that
some of these names are very much a
product of the 1970s. I was in high
school. That's how old I am in the
1970s. And I'm just, you know, there was
like the particle of the month club.
What new particle was being discovered
in the new accelerators in California
and elsewhere. Uh, and we were just
building this fabric of the universe out
of that. That's kind of cool actually.
Fun to be witness to it. It was fun.
That's fun. Yeah. Not participant, but
witness. Could you expend a moment just
celebrating the idea of symmetry in
physics? Yeah, this is a really really
great question. So, symmetry in physics
um this is something that is extremely
deep and has been very very predictive
and powerful over the last hundred years
of physics. So this is a question that
in my classes to undergraduates I try
and convey that a lot of physics is
based on looking at a phenomena that you
see like an apple falling from a tree
and saying you know how do I model the
the path that that's going to fall right
like how do I write an equation that
describes that but once you start
talking about symmetries and these are
uh basically rules for how you might
change a space or an equation in ways
that can leave it alone. Once you start
talking about symmetries, you actually
have the power to ask, could the theory
that I'm describing be any different? It
allows you to ask questions about not
just what you observe, but whether any
theory that you write down could have uh
arisen differently in nature. So there's
some um kind of highulutin quote by
Einstein that you know saying he wanted
to to probe God's thoughts um you know
in terms of his theories which sounds
extremely grandiose but the the tangible
non theological um underpinning of that
is that you can ask for a theory if I
write down this theory like Einstein's
theory of relativity could it have been
different what is the freedom to uh
change that theory at all could there
have been any other theory of gravity
that could have worked what does it what
what does it have to do with the our
understanding understanding of what the
word symmetry means. Right? So the idea
behind symmetries is that if I tell you
about the rules for what I can do for a
theory and leave it alone, that is
equivalent to specifying the theory. So
for example, um if you want to ask how
do the laws how are the laws of physics
impacted by the fact that if I do an
experiment here and then I move that
experiment 5t to the left and do the
same experiment, I should get the same
answer. Right? What is that the
implication of that for the laws of
physics? It turns out that that
phenomena that you know the laws of
physics shouldn't care whether your
laboratory is here versus 5t to the
left. That's very much linked to
something like the conservation of
momentum in classical physics or the
fact that you should do an experiment
today and get the same answer tomorrow
is related to the idea that energy is
conserved in classical physics. So all
of these um sort of can I shift
something you know in some concrete way.
There I talked about, you know, moving
an experiment or doing the same
experiment at different points in time.
But, uh, in more general, you can say if
I could characterize all the different
ways that I can, you know, pick
something up, turn it over, look at it,
you know, shift its description, and if
it stays the same, that actually tells
me what equations are compatible with
that in a really predictive way. I've
got another symmetry here, mirror
symmetry. So, what do you have for us
there? M so mirror symmetry was uh
originally discovered um in the context
of these string compactifications. So
considering solutions of string theory
that could lead to you know physics like
we we see in our universe. The compact
extra dimensions that people were trying
to write down they discovered that all
the solutions they could find seem to
come in pairs and these pairs involved
interchanging topological numbers. So a
topological number is all the ways that
you can change a geometry or sorry is
characterized by all the ways you can
change a geometry um without
intrinsically changing what it is. So
the classic example is that you can
change a donut into a coffee cup. So you
you picture you know taking yourself a
donut and if you imagine the material
was all rubbery and you could stretch it
and squish it any way you want but not
cut it. How can you deform that shape or
change it or put another hole in it? And
and this is a coffee cup with a a little
finger hole with a handle. Yeah. Yeah.
With It wouldn't work if it didn't have
a handle. Right. Right. So it was just
like a drinking glass. Doesn't work.
Yeah. Not the coffee cup from Starbucks
because that doesn't have a handle.
Right. Okay. Okay. The the idea there is
that a geometry with a single hole. You
can't change the number of holes.
Whether that's the center of the doughut
or if you could smoosh it around and
turn it into the handle of a coffee cup.
Um that's what's called a topological
invariant. But the number of holes is
one of these examples of of topological
numbers. So a a donut has one hole. You
could imagine, you know, a donut that
was built to have two holes and so on.
You know, this this kind of thing
describes or characterizes geometry. So
in mirror symmetry, all these geometries
come with topological numbers. But any
combinations you could have, it turns
out you could have in more than one
configuration. And this again sort of
divides the space of possible geometries
in half in this case. Uh it tells you
that all of them are are you know
interchangeable in concrete ways.
Wow.
Man, that is insane.
First of all,
why? Why?
It's a really great question. That's so
crazy. I love it though. Well, but I got
more here. Well, we just we're just
we're just cracking this egg. You know
what? Do I have a kabi yao manifolds? So
these are examples of configurations for
the shapes of extra dimensions in the
string theory that satisfy Einstein's
equations. Um so these are the the half
a billion possibilities that I was
talking about. Manifold I didn't get the
word manifold. Yeah, y'all got that from
Star Trek. Get out of here.
Named after two very clever
mathematicians. Um yeah, these manifolds
were conjectured to exist by a
mathematician named Eugene Kabi and
proved by uh Yao who won a Fields Medal
for his proof that um these these things
solve Einstein's equations. Do you know
about the Fields Medal? No, I don't. So,
it's kind of like the Nobel Prize in
mathematics. Um it's given to major, you
know, substantive discoveries in
mathematics. Um but the catch is you got
to be under 40 to to get it. So, um you
have to be young and clever. Oh, man. Of
course, the mathematicians would use
chronology as a determining fact. Yeah.
Discriminating. It's agist. I think it
is. Yeah. Exactly. Homological
field mirror symmetry. So, this is um an
example of something where there was a
dialogue between string theory and
mathematics that was really fruitful. So
these observations about clabia
manifolds and their topology were first
observed in string theory and
mathematicians went away and tried to
sort of explain why that was happening
and found a correspondence between a lot
of deeper mathematical structures that
actually led to another fields metal for
a gentleman named Kvich. That's Maxim
Kvich. Maxim that sounds Russian
exactly. So this type of of structure
you know this dialogue between maths and
physics I personally think is really
fruitful. We've learned a lot from
mathematicians um from building these
kinds of things. And then the the fun
question that I'm asking recently is,
you know, could there be new variants of
this that could lead to new physics, new
predictions for particle physics, but
also new mathematical structures. So
some of the dualities we're looking at
right now involve not just changing two
manifolds or or two configurations of
geometry, but actually mixing things
like electromagnetic fields in those
backgrounds with geometry. So there's
all sorts of weird and wonderful uh you
know mixing of possible degrees of
freedom in the theory that could still
magically leave the physics alone.
There's surely plenty of physicists out
there are perfectly trained in all their
physics but don't have your math
background. So in a way they're kind of
researching with blinders on given how
much more you see in the mathematical
regimes. Is that a fair characterization
here? The the push back somebody might
say you know you're you're sort of
torturing yourself by trying to solve
really hard problems in math and physics
at the same time. So there are lots of
questions where you don't need this
degree of math. But unfortunately, the
path to the physical questions we want
to answer leads through this crazy hairy
geometry in high dimensions to be able
to to answer the physics we want in
string theory. So, we kind of don't have
a choice. This evokes Einstein where I
don't think he was totally up on
non-ucuklitian geometry, differential
geometry, all that. He wasn't totally up
on that and needed some help, right?
Even though he had the physics going.
Oh, man. I would love to meet Einstein's
tutor.
What do you do? I tutor Einstein in
geometry. That's off. Yeah.
This marriage of frontier physics and
emergent math. I mean, this is it's been
going since the very beginning. And I
might offer a cosmic perspective on that
as we close it out. All righty. One of
the features of research scientists in
academia is to get really smart people
working on problems where there's no
obligation or expectation that there's a
sellable product at the end of that
exercise. What it means is that the mind
can roam freely on the boundaries of
what is known and unknown in the
universe. And in physics that has always
occurred
has always occurred in tandem with
advances in mathematics. You go back to
ancient Greece, they're trying to
measure the shape of the earth. Is it
round? Is it not? The word geometry gets
introduced. And if you look at what that
means, it means earth measurement.
Geometry.
And so you look at this juxtaposition of
our advances in science and our advances
in mathematics. And these are two fields
that so often people in school say, I
don't not good at math and I'm not good
at physics and I'm going to meanwhile is
the foundation of our understanding of
our place in existence in this universe.
So I look forward to further advances on
the frontier of physics and how they
marry with further advances in
mathematics. No matter how obscure it
might look to the passer by, one day in
the end, you'll be living with it as we
currently are with all the trappings of
modern engineering, technology, and
society at large.
And that's a cosmic perspective. So,
Lara, I mean, this has been a delightful
conversation. We've learned a lot or or
you've you've told us a lot.
Maybe I I learned maybe twothirds of it.
Uh what's your fraction on that? I am
just as dumb as I ever have been. But I
feel smart. There you go. That's all
that matters. And so again, you're at
Virginia Tech and you teach uh a course
on general relativity, Einstein's
relativity. Uh love it. So you're a pure
theorist, right? So you don't they don't
invite you into the particle
accelerators, correct? I have been
invited, but I'm I'm kept on a very
short leash and then let out again. Um,
see I was on a mountain once observing
in the mountains of Chile and I invited
a theorist to come and when he came
there was an earthquake. Wow. So that
he's never invited back. Yeah, this is
it was clear the theorists are just get
out of my get out of my lab.
Do you know which end of the telescope
to look through? You know. No, it's a
it's a fun riff over time, but we know
we need each other. Yes. Yes. So, thanks
again, Laura, for being on Star Talk and
Chuck. Always good to have you, man.
Always a pleasure. All right, this has
been Star Talk string theory edition.
Neil deGrasse Tyson. Keep looking up.
[Music]